okay let's bring in Samuel Romani who's
is an associate fellow with the Royal
United Services Institute he joins us
live from London a very warm welcome to
you I wonder if we can reflect on what
we've just heard there from my colleague
Mike Hannah um so Joe Biden leader of
the Free World is saying that Gaza in
the West Bank should be reunited under a
single governance structure it's all
good and well you know Jumping the Shark
or jumping the gun and setting out a
vision for the future but what we've got
right now is a bitter conflict raging on
the ground with no end in do you think
it was a wise decision for him to
publish a statement like
that well I think that basically the US
is trying to distance itself from n's
comments about the indefinite security
presence which many particularly within
his far Coalition like Ben gavier and
others have interpreted as a
reoccupation of Gaza like before 2005
and Biden wants to make it clear that
that's not the US's position and other
American officials have been doing the
same thing we saw Brett mcer another
senior American official say in the five
NOS that he about the Gaza War one of
them is no to
occupation the Israelis have suggested
all that needs to happen is for Hamas
fighters to surrender and to hand over
the captives or the war will continue
meanwhile the kasan Brigade they gave a
statement on Friday saying that they
basically ready for a long war and then
they've planned for all of this this
sounds like a commitment from both of
these belligerant to continue this
conflict whatever the cost what are your
thoughts well I think it's very likely
that this war is going to continue for a
long time time it was pretty telling in
n's uh recent interview last weekend
saying that you know he wouldn't rule
out a war of even lasting longer than a
year so this the Israelis are ined for
the Long Haul because they want to
destroy all of Hamas not just decapitate
the Gaza City leadership but also the
Hamas militants in their tunnels and the
Alazan brigades Hamas know this is an
existential War for them so they're
going to keep fighting for as long as
possible in that case how can you find a
political root out of this when they're
doesn't seem to be a single moderate
voice
involved well I may think that's
extremely difficult I mean obviously on
narrow issues like what Qatar is doing
with regards to the relief of the
hostages there could be some incremental
progress and that might also translate
into humanitarian puses the compromises
that digital made earlier on in the
conflict to reopen two of the three
major water pipes and allow a little bit
of fuel now maybe coming in through the
rer crossing are the kinds of
compromises we can expect but a grand
bargain a solution a truce like we saw
happen in 2009 or 2021 after a
relatively short conflict is not really
going to happen right now after more
than a month of War of this um
asymmetrical conflict how do you
evaluate hamas's military capabilities
do you think that they anticipated this
respose well I mean Hamas before the war
reportedly had about eight months of
stockpiles of weapons that he could have
and that included a lot of rockets which
are very cheaply made $300 some of them
made by constructing pipes together and
they also have a great deal of
motivation and uh they know that this
war is existential for them so even
though Hamas doesn't have that much in
terms of technological sophistication it
still can strike back also they got RPGs
which seem to have damaged some Israeli
artillery that's probably why the
Israelis have asked for 75 light armored
inry vehicles in the United States in
their arms request package now we've
been saying for a few days now that
there are apparent signs of cracks uh in
the United States certainly public
opinion appears to be shifting possibly
also views in the White House shifting
also but given the US has just approved
of 145 billion military aid package for
Israel what could we really count as
proof of any real change of policy US
policy towards
Israel well I mean I think that there's
some internal criticism obviously of the
US policy towards Israel we saw that
with the 200 USD Department employees
who expressed uh opposition to it and
we've seen that also with some comments
from figures like John Kirby because
basically saying that Israel is not
doing enough to kill to prevent
civilians from being killed but those
are in line with the past us responses
for example even though George W Bush
was so pro Israel in 2002 he spoke out
against Israeli killings in the West
Bank on one occasion so with more just
slapping on the risk and chiding Israel
and no sign of any kind of a strategic
break between the US and Israel and
that's why the arms package is going
ahead us is still supporting Israel
despite some reservations about the
civilian cost associated with doing so
so it is possible for the US to play the
role of critical friend but maybe so far
not critical enough Sam Romani from the
Royal United Services Institute many
thanks thank you very much